Obs-tackle: an obstacle detection system to assist navigation of
visually impaired using smartphones
U. Vijetha1 ·V. Geetha1
Received: 24 March 2023 / Revised: 5 December 2023 / Accepted: 6 December 2023 / Published online: 19 January 2024
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2024
Abstract
As the prevalence of vision impairment continues to rise worldwide, there is an increasing need for affordable and accessible
solutions that improve the daily experiences of individuals with vision impairment. The Visually Impaired (VI) are often prone
to falls and injuries due to their inability to recognize dangers on the path while navigating. It is therefore crucial that they
are aware of potential hazards in both known and unknown environments. Obstacle detection plays a key role in navigation
assistance solutions for VI users. There has been a surge in experimentation on obstacle detection since the introduction of
autonomous navigation in automobiles, robots, and drones. Previously, auditory, laser, and depth sensors dominated obstacle
detection; however, advances in computer vision and deep learning have enabled it using simpler tools like smartphone
cameras. While previous approaches to obstacle detection using estimated depth data have been effective, they suffer from
limitations such as compromised accuracy when adapted for edge devices and the incapability to identify objects in the scene.
To address these limitations, we propose an indoor and outdoor obstacle detection and identification technique that combines
semantic segmentation with depth estimation data. We hypothesize that this combination of techniques will enhance obstacle
detection and identification compared to using depth data alone. To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed Obstacle
detection method, we validated it against ground truth Obstacle data derived from the DIODE and NYU Depth v2 dataset.
Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method achieves near 85% accuracy in detecting nearby obstacles
with lower false positive and false negative rates. The demonstration of the proposed system deployed as an Android app-
‘Obs-tackle’ is available at https://youtu.be/PSn-FEc5EQg?si=qPGB13tkYkD1kSOf.
Keywords Visually impaired (VI) · Obstacle detection · Obstacle avoidance · Navigation guidance

- Introduction -
Vision loss was estimated to affect 1.1 billion people world-
wide in 2020, including 18.2% of the Indian population as
reported in Vision Atlas [2]. Visual impairment is a serious
condition that causes partial or total vision loss. The loss of
vision significantly impacts the individual’s quality of life
and, more importantly, their self-esteem. Day-to-day activi-
ties such as navigating safely in indoor/outdoor spaces, which
are easily accomplished by sighted people, can be major hur-
dles for them.

- Proposed work -
Based on the inherent system requirements gathered from the
literature survey, we summarize the key components required
for the solution as follows:
• A method to identify objects and their relative distances
from the user.
• A technique to confine this list to nearby obstacles only.
• A path planning technique to guide the user around obsta-
cles.
Figure of workflow attached presents a comprehensive overview of our pro-
posed architecture, which consists of three core modules: the
Data Transformation module, the Obstacle Detection mod-
ule, and the Path Planner module. Each of these components
play a distinct role in providing effective navigation guidance
to the user.

The Data Transformation module serves as the initial step
intheprocess. It takes monocular RGB video frames captured
by the user’s smartphone and processes them to generate
two crucial representations of the captured frame: seman-
tic segmentation image and estimated depth image. These
representations are essential for understanding the environ-
ment. The semantic segmentation images classify objects in
the scene, allowing the system to identify pathways, pedes-
trians, vehicles, and other relevant elements. The estimated
depth images provide a sense of distance, enabling the system
to understand the proximity to objects.
The output from the Data Transformation module is used
by Obstacle Detection Module (ODM). The ODM uses the
estimated depth data to isolate segments within a predefined
depth threshold. These segments represent potential obsta-
cles in the user’s path. The ODM’s primary function is to
identify and flag these obstacles, ensuring that the system
can make informed decisions regarding navigation.
The identified obstacle segments are then relayed to the
Path Planner module. The Path Planner uses Fuzzy logic
to evaluate the risk posed by obstacles and determines the
appropriate course of action. The Path Planner generates real-
time alerts and navigation instructions that are tailored to
the specific obstacle and risk level. These instructions are
communicated to the user through the smartphone’s audio
speakers. The following subsections describe in detail the
roles and responsibilities of each module.

3.1 Data transformation module (DTM)
The proposed system receives real-time video input from the
smartphonecamera. At regular intervals, frames are extracted
from this video stream and then subjected to further pro-
cessing. The captured frames typically exhibit too much
redundancy and complex details, making them less suitable
for further analysis.
In the context of obstacle detection and avoidance, the
system must have information about the proximity of objects
within the captured images and the identity of those objects.
The raw RGB images, in their original form, merely represent
pixel values without providing any insight into an object’s
distance or identity. To meet these objectives, the input image
needs to be transformed into a format that conveys informa-
tion about object distances within the scene and provides
a means of identifying these objects. Recent advancements
in computer vision have enabled us to estimate depth infor-
mation from monocular RGB images, thus offering insights
into the spatial arrangement of objects. Semantic segmenta-
tion models assign semantic labels to individual pixels in the
image, effectively providing identifiers for various entities
present in the captured scene.
The representations derived from both the Depth Estima-
tion model and Semantic Segmentation model significantly
reduce the complexity of the initial RGB data, consolidating
it into formats that contain minimal yet highly task-specific
information. DTM transforms the captured input image I into
its semantic segmentation Is and disparity image Id counter-
parts. The functionality of DTM can be formulated as
Is, Id = f dtm(I) (1)
The subsequent modules in the proposed workflow ana-
lyze Is and Id to extract details about nearby obstacles in the
scene and for path planning.
Semantic segmentation Semantic segmentation is a dense
prediction task that involves annotating each pixel in an
image I with a class label. The functionality of a semantic
segmentation model φsemseg can be formulated as
Is = φsemseg(I, θ semseg, n) (2)

where θsemseg refers to the parameters of the model φsemseg
and n is the number of classes to be identified by the segmentation model.
In a conventional semantic segmentation paradigm, an
encoder network generates low-resolution feature maps, subsequently upsampled by a decoder network to create a
full-resolution segmentation map. However, the encoder’s
sampling technique leads to a loss of image features, resulting in upsampled images with chunky blocks of segments.
To address this, Long et al. [39] introduced skip connections to fill in the missing features in the sampled segmented
image. PSPNet [40] enhanced performance by reconstructing data at various levels, enabling necessary adjustments
during upsampling. DeepLabv3+ [41] selectively incorporates the advantages of encoder-decoder networks to gather
information from previous steps and uses pyramid pooling
to encode the image at different scales, restoring more information.
Recently, a class of semantic segmentation models have
been introduced that can produce results in real-time or
near real-time. ICNet [42] builds upon the idea of PSP Net
and optimizes it by performing more computation on lowresolution features and less computation on high-resolution
features. PIDNet [43] uses a pyramid dilated convolutional
neural network architecture that combines dilated convolution with spatial pyramid pooling to capture multi-scale
contextual information. Topformer [44] uses self-attention
mechanisms to capture long-range dependencies and context information between pixels. It achieves state-of-the-art
performance on several benchmark datasets. We use the
Topformer semantic segmentation model pre-trained on the
ADE20k dataset for our task. This model has demonstrated
consistent and dependable segmentation results in real-time,
making it an ideal choice for a smartphone-based solution.
Disparity estimation Disparity refers to the difference in
image location of an object seen by a stereo camera’s left
and right lenses. Closer objects show a significant disparity. As the objects travel further, the disparity decreases. As
a result, the disparity can be used to calculate the object’s
depth from the camera. Previously, disparity computation
was restricted to stereo camera setups. Advances in deep
learning have enabled models trained on stereo image pairs
to estimate disparity from a single input image. The functionality of a disparity estimation model φdisp can be formulated
as a function of the input image I and model parameters θdisp
as shown in equation (3).
Id = φdisp(I, θdisp) (3)
In the proposed architecture, the pre-trained Midas Depth
estimation model [13] is used to estimate the disparity image.
The flexible loss function of the model allows it to be trained
on multiple datasets with incompatible depth ranges and
Fig. 3 Combining depth and semantic segmentation for enhanced
obstacle detection
scales, making it unique compared to its competitors. The
zero-shot cross-dataset transfer allows the model to produce
reliable results even when dealing with new and unknown
data.

3.2 Obstacle detection module (ODM)
In the past, obstacle detection heavily relied on precise depth
data from sources like stereo cameras, RGB-D cameras, or
Lidar sensors. The emergence of depth estimation models
has revolutionized this process, offering distance estimates
to objects within a scene. However, it is important to note
that depth data alone falls short of providing object identities. In contrast, semantic segmentation assigns semantic
labels to each pixel in an image, facilitating robust object
recognition. Despite the advancements in depth estimation
for detecting nearby objects and semantic segmentation for
identifying object classes, the effectiveness of these models is
often compromised when deployed on resource-constrained
devices using tflite models.
In Fig. 3, we can observe the depth and semantic segmentation representations of the input image. While the depth
representation provides a coarse estimate of the objects’
depth in the scene, the semantic segmentation also exhibits
reduced clarity in the output segments. To fulfill the objective
of detecting and identifying nearby objects and to address the
issue of quality degradation encountered with tflite models,
we propose a method for fusing depth and segmentation data.
The proposed idea operates on the assumption that combining the outputs of the semantic segmentation and depth
estimation tflite models will help compensate for each other’s
imperfections, leading to an enhanced overall performance.
As observed in Fig. 3, the combination of depth and semantic segmentation data yields the desired obstacle detection
results that can be useful in navigation guidance tasks. The
functionality of ODM is formulated as
Os = fodm(Is, Id , thresholdd ) (4)

Algorithm 1 Obstacle Detection
Input: Semantic Segment Image Is , Disparity image Id
Output: Obstacle Image Os
1: for semanticLabel ∈ Is do
2: for each component c ∈ semanticLabel do
3: disparityc ⇐ max DisparityV alue(c)
4:
5: if disparityc ≤ thresholdd Or segment(c) == path then
6: Discard component
7: else
8: Add c to Os
9: end if
10: end for
11: end for
where thresholdd is the predefined disparity threshold set
for obstacle detection.
Algorithm 1 outlines the functionality of the Obstacle Detection Module. Given an input image I, the estimated disparity image Id and semantic segmentation image
Is is generated using the pre-trained models in DTM.
ODM is responsible for segregating the different segments
S0, S1, S2, ...Sn in the image and discarding the segments
are away from a predefined distance threshold. Through
extensive experimentation, we have identified that setting
the disparity threshold at 60% of the maximum disparity
value effectively detects obstacles in the immediate vicinity. However, the value of the threshold may vary depending
on application specific requirements.
The disparity of each segment Si is computed and finalized
as shown in (5).
dSi = max(disp(s) : s ∈ Si)
dSi =
{
dSi dSi > thresholdd
0 Otherwise
}
(5)

Figure 4 provides a step-by-step visualization of the steps
defined in Algorithm 1. The disparity image produced by the
Midas v2 tflite model provides a rough estimate of the nearer
and farther pixels in the image. This information is used to
identify the semantic segments in the image that qualifies for
nearer objects.
